<h2>What, why and how ? Understanding this visualization thanks to abstraction</h2>
<p style="color:#111111;">
This visualization uses data from datos.gov.co. The principal objective here is to show or discover some interesting insights about this data, knowing that the principal question here is:<br/><b>Could we know more about the thematics of the festivities in Valle del Cauca, Colombia and their relationships ?</b>
<br/><br/>
The other objetives are more academic: to use d3, to represent a network in a visualization, to publish the web page on GithubPages etc. The technologies used are d3 (javascript), HTML, CSS, Java (for processing the csv file into a json file) and git (nodejs for developing with a local server). There is no specific prerequisites for enjoying the visualization neither for using the code, available in github.
<br/><br/>
To be more precise, in the following paragraphs first we will explain what were our data (through data abstraction), why this visualization (through task abstraction) and to conclude the reason of how we choice to present the data (idioms : visual encoding and interaction) ; thanks to that, we have been able to answer to the title question : <i>Festivities in Valle del Cauca, Colombia : which thematics should I expect for an event? And which are the relationships between them?</i>. Our answers will be the insights of this visualization!
<br/>
</p>
<p style="color:#789410;font-size:110%">What ?</p>
<p style="color:#111111;">
Let's precise first that here two datasets are used. Both have been created from the original dataset thanks to a custom Java program (available in the repository). The two final datasets have the same structure, just the content of the attribute group change. The final dataset type is <b>network</b> (initially, it was a <b>table</b> - originally, almost all the dataset are tables, but, after processing the data for creating new datasets (and new files) we obtained two network datasets. For this case, the dataset was a good cantidate for network dataset because it contains categorical data,  hidden categorical data and hidden relationships between categories.</br>The dataset availability is <b>static</b> because the dataset available on the website is not modified in real-time, so we just download the file from the website and load it on github. So for this case, we had to process the data, so we have done a <b>derivation task</b> to get <b>the derived data</b>.<br/><br/>
Before processing the data in d3, the <b>items</b> represent each one event or a festival, which has the following characteristics: id, city, name, date, periodicity, group, modality, size, fundings, entity, entityType and description. These characteristics are the <b>attributes</b>.<br/><br/>
The <b>attributes</b> name, city, periodicity, group, modality, fundings, entity, entityType and despcription are categorical. The <b>attributes</b> size is quantitative ordinal sequential. The <b>attributes</b> id and date can be considered quantitative ordinal, sequential for id, cyclic for date. Besides, we only use (directly) the id, name and the group. The other attributes were used indirectly when searching keywords for clusters in the whole CSV file.<br/><br/>
After processing the data, we obtain <b>the same items</b>: each item is still one event or a festival. About the attribute, the id is the key value of each item. Each item/node has other attributes : name (still categorical, the same of the one present in the original data), group (in the first dataset, the attribute group directly, in the second dataset the value is calculated with the derivation task and represents the keywords which are present in the different original fields of the node) which is still categorical and an attribute main which is also categorical - true or false, to determine weither a node is a "cluster" node (its name and group are both a cluster name like "Carnaval") or a "simple" node (its name is the name of an event and its group is the cluster name(s) like "cultura música" to whom it belongs).<br/><br/>
</p>
<p style="color:#789410;font-size:110%">Why ?</p>
<p style="color:#111111;">
Before talking about the wanted tasks, we have to mention that we did derivation tasks (as explained before that). We processed the data and obtained a new file where data are a network, with this structure: <i>{"nodes": [{"id": "35", "name": "Aniversario de Roldanillo", "group": "cultura música ","main": "false"}, ... ], "links": [{"source": "35", "target": "cultura", "value": "1"}, ... ]}</i>. These derivation tasks, in terms of Tamara were <b>Derive (action) Feature (target) on the items with all their attributes (derivation for discovering keywords, derivation for getting new nodes and derivation for getting links between nodes)</b>.<br/><br/>
Which tasks do we want to be able to perform here?<br/><br/>
As said in the title, first, the primary task we want to perform here is <b>to show the current categories of events and festivals in Valle del Cauca.</b>
In terms of Tamara, the action is <b>Explore</b> and the target is <b>Topology</b>. For this behaviour we use the first dataset. Thanks to the name putted on each cluster we can also, in terms of Tamara, <b>locate</b> the <b>clusters</b>.
<br/><br/>
But, also as said in the title, another primary task would be <b>to know the relationships between the events or the kind of events.</b> Here is the explanation for the usage of a second dataset. First, this dataset allows, in terms of Tamara, to <b>explore</b> a new <b>topology</b> (we could also consider it as as Discover because this topology was totally hidden, not present in the original data!). And about the task we just explained above, in terms of Tamara, the action is <b>Identify</b> and the target is <b>Features</b> : the user is able to see the relationships between each node, and thanks to the spatial position of the nodes he can identify in one look the relationships which are the most present.
So thanks to these tasks we have been able to get some <b>insights</b>. The first one, from dataset 1, is that we could divide the events in <b>4 categories ("Artístico cultural", "Religioso-Patronal", "Carnaval y fiesta popular", "Patriótico-Civíco)")</b> where the biggest one would be "Artístico cultural". But, more important, new categories (more detailed categories) have been detected: thanks to dataset 2, <b>we know that when talking about "Artístico cultural" it means mostly "Música", "Danza", "Conciertos", "Tradicionales (danzas)" and not for example cinema</b>. As an other example, <b>we also know that when talking about "Religioso-Patronal" it means mostly "San" como "San Pedro" or "San Antonio"</b>. About the relationships, thanks to dataset 2, we can identify <b>repeated relations for example between the thematics "Danza" and "Tradicionales" which means that "danza" is very "tradicional"</b> (and that when someone said "tradicional" it could be probably talking in the same sentence of "danza"). Another interesting relation because quite unexpected at least for foreigners: <b>there are repeated relations between the thematics "Música" and "san" which means that "música" is often present during religious ("san") events.</b> That was quite unexpected and totally hidden in the original data and the first dataset!
<br/><br/>
One secondary task could be to detect the events or festivals which gather the most important number of thenatics. In terms of Tamara, at a high-level, this task is <b>Discover (action) Outliers (target) (the nodes)</b> and at a low-level that the action is <b>Identify</b> and the target is <b>Outliers</b> (the nodes). We can perform this task by reading the words which are written over each node: thanks to our visualization (and the number of nodes which is reasonable) we can without too much difficulty see that some nodes have more words than other. As a result, for this task, <b>the insight is that the node which belongs to more thematics (7/8!!!) is ... "Festival de la cultura por la paz" !</b> It seems legit, because as it is a festival for the peace, it must please to the major number of people. Other nodes belong to many thematics: "Fiestas de la nieblina" (5) or "Semana Santa Cultural" (4)...
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p style="color:#789410;font-size:110%">How ?</p>
<p style="color:#111111;">
We choose <b>network</b> for this visualization and note that both network graphs have the same HOW choices.<br/><br/>
First, we have to say that there is no axis here.<br/><br/>
About the visual encoding, the <b>mark</b> we choose is <b>point</b> for the nodes : it represents one item it means one event or festival in Valle del Cauca. We also have created nodes (so also points) which do not represent one event but a thematic (cluster name). The <b>mark</b> we choose is <b>line</b> for the links : it represents one link between nodes (so links between events or festivals in Valle del Cauca or links between one event or festival and a "cluster node"). About the <b>channel</b> for the nodes, it is <b>color hue</b>. We could also consider that <b>spatial position</b> is a channel because their positions help us to determine some clusters: here we would be talking about the encoding for <b>grouping</b> the nodes in clusters, by proximity. Note that it is also a consequence of the links used as connections and the "Separate" made by the strength (force simulation), used for building the network - see after that). It is because the attribute group is categorical; so it can be easily explain because these channels are the most <b>effective</b> for the categorical attributes (which should always use identity channels, in theory, so from this point of view, we use a good and expressive type).</p> About the <b>channel</b> for the links, we could consider that it is <b>length</b> but it really does not represent a specific value, the length is due to the strength (force simulation) which is used for building the network (with clusters).
Note that we write on the nodes the thematics that the node belongs to, it could be considered as a supplementary mark.
</br></br>
We choose to <b>separate</b> the nodes as the idea was to be able to identify clusters (there are no order and no align). It combines well with our categorical attribute (group/thematic) and with our principal tasks (explore topology, identify features).
<br/><br/>
Then about the interactions, first we decide to provide to the user one interaction with a button. It allows him to show another graph next to the fist one: it is a <b>Juxtapose</b>. Then, note that we could consider that we used a <b>Superimpose</b> by putting the names of the thematics of a node on the node itself. And, to conclude, we also provide a <b>“Select” manipulation</b>, with a mouseover on the nodes, which allows to get the name of the current event/festival (the node) - note that you can also grab the nodes and move it (it could be considered as <b>“Select”/"Change" manipulation</b>) - the graph just rebuilds itself with the usage of forces.</p>
</p>